clang-tools-extra/docs/clang-tidy/checks/bugprone/crtp-constructor-accessibility.rst, before:

.. title:: clang-tidy - bugprone-crtp-constructor-accessibility

bugprone-crtp-constructor-accessibility
=======================================

Detects error-prone Curiously Recurring Template Pattern usage, when the CRTP
can be constructed outside itself and the derived class.

The CRTP is an idiom, in which a class derives from a template class, where 
itself is the template argument. It should be ensured that if a class is
intended to be a base class in this idiom, it can only be instantiated if
the derived class is its template argument.

Example:

.. code-block:: c++

  template <typename T> class CRTP {
  private:
    CRTP() = default;
    friend T;
  };

  class Derived : CRTP<Derived> {};

Below can be seen some common mistakes that will allow the breaking of the 
idiom.

If the constructor of a class intended to be used in a CRTP is public, then
it allows users to construct that class on its own.

Example:

.. code-block:: c++

  template <typename T> class CRTP {
  public:
    CRTP() = default;
  };

  class Good : CRTP<Good> {};
  Good GoodInstance;

  CRTP<int> BadInstance;

If the constructor is protected, the possibility of an accidental instantiation
is prevented, however it can fade an error, when a different class is used as
the template parameter instead of the derived one.

Example:

.. code-block:: c++

  template <typename T> class CRTP {
  protected:
    CRTP() = default;
  };

  class Good : CRTP<Good> {};
  Good GoodInstance;

  class Bad : CRTP<Good> {};
  Bad BadInstance;

To ensure that no accidental instantiation happens, the best practice is to 
make the constructor private and declare the derived class as friend. Note
that as a tradeoff, this also gives the derived class access to every other
private members of the CRTP.

Example:

.. code-block:: c++

  template <typename T> class CRTP {
    CRTP() = default;
    friend T;
  };

  class Good : CRTP<Good> {};
  Good GoodInstance;

  class Bad : CRTP<Good> {};
  Bad CompileTimeError;

  CRTP<int> AlsoCompileTimeError;

Limitations:

* The check is not supported below C++11

* The check does not handle when the derived class is passed as a variadic
  template argument

* Accessible functions that can construct the CRTP, like factory functions
  are not checked

The check also suggests a fix-its in some cases.

Commit message:

[clang-tidy] Fix false positives in `bugprone-crtp-constructor-accessibility` check (#132543)
Fix false positives in `bugprone-crtp-constructor-accessibility` check
on deleted constructors that cannot be used to construct objects, even
if they have public or protected access.

Closes https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/issues/131737.

clang-tools-extra/docs/clang-tidy/checks/bugprone/crtp-constructor-accessibility.rst, after:

.. title:: clang-tidy - bugprone-crtp-constructor-accessibility

bugprone-crtp-constructor-accessibility
=======================================

Detects error-prone Curiously Recurring Template Pattern usage, when the CRTP
can be constructed outside itself and the derived class.

The CRTP is an idiom, in which a class derives from a template class, where 
itself is the template argument. It should be ensured that if a class is
intended to be a base class in this idiom, it can only be instantiated if
the derived class is its template argument.

Example:

.. code-block:: c++

  template <typename T> class CRTP {
  private:
    CRTP() = default;
    friend T;
  };

  class Derived : CRTP<Derived> {};

Below can be seen some common mistakes that will allow the breaking of the 
idiom.

If the constructor of a class intended to be used in a CRTP is public, then
it allows users to construct that class on its own.

Example:

.. code-block:: c++

  template <typename T> class CRTP {
  public:
    CRTP() = default;
  };

  class Good : CRTP<Good> {};
  Good GoodInstance;

  CRTP<int> BadInstance;

If the constructor is protected, the possibility of an accidental instantiation
is prevented, however it can fade an error, when a different class is used as
the template parameter instead of the derived one.

Example:

.. code-block:: c++

  template <typename T> class CRTP {
  protected:
    CRTP() = default;
  };

  class Good : CRTP<Good> {};
  Good GoodInstance;

  class Bad : CRTP<Good> {};
  Bad BadInstance;

To ensure that no accidental instantiation happens, the best practice is to 
make the constructor private and declare the derived class as friend. Note
that as a tradeoff, this also gives the derived class access to every other
private members of the CRTP. However, constructors can still be public or
protected if they are deleted.

Example:

.. code-block:: c++

  template <typename T> class CRTP {
    CRTP() = default;
    friend T;
  };

  class Good : CRTP<Good> {};
  Good GoodInstance;

  class Bad : CRTP<Good> {};
  Bad CompileTimeError;

  CRTP<int> AlsoCompileTimeError;

Limitations:

* The check is not supported below C++11

* The check does not handle when the derived class is passed as a variadic
  template argument

* Accessible functions that can construct the CRTP, like factory functions
  are not checked

The check also suggests a fix-its in some cases.
